---
title: 'OT_Analysis: a software for rich analysis of force curves when probing living cells with optical tweezers'
tags:
  - Python
  - optical tweezers
  - cell biology
  - mechanobiology
authors:
  - name: Thierry Galliano
    affiliation: 1 # (Multiple affiliations must be quoted)
  - name: Guillaume Gay
    orcid: 0000-0002-5444-5246
    affiliation: 2 # (Multiple affiliations must be quoted)
  - name: Laurent Limozin
    orcid: 0000-0001-9523-8086
    affiliation: 1 # (Multiple affiliations must be quoted)
  - name: Pierre-Henri Puech
    corresponding : true
    orcid:  0000-0002-8521-0685
    affiliation: 1 # (Multiple affiliations must be quoted)  
  
affiliations:
  - name: Inserm UMR 1067, CNRS UMR 7333, AMU UM61, The Turing Centre for Living Systems (CENTURI) ; Lab. Adh√©sion et Inflammation ; Marseille - France
    index: 1
  - name: France Bio Imaging ; Montpellier - France
    index: 2
date: 30 june 2022
bibliography: paper.bib

---


# Summary

Optical tweezers are a light-based technique for micromanipulating
objects. It allows to move objects such as microbeads and cells, and to
record minute forces down to a few pN, which makes it a technique very
well adapted to mechanical measurements on living cells
[@gennerich_optical:2017]. We are interested in the mechano-transduction
properties of lymphocytes. We seek to dissect the effect of forces and
cell mechanics on the cellular response, in the context of the immune
system. T cell mechanotransduction has been recently demonstrated to be
instrumental in the finesse and accuracy of the response of the latter
@puech_mechanotransduction:2021]. Aside, cells can exert forces when
performing their action, eg. cytotoxic T cells are using forces to kill
target infected cells [@basu_cytotoxic:2016].

Using optical tweezers and specifically decorated beads as handles, we
pull membrane nano-tubes from gently adhered living lymphocytes
[@sadoun_dissecting:2020]. Such nanotubes are usually used to probe the
tension of adherent cells [@diz-munoz_control:2010]. By varying the
antibodies that are used to decorate the beads, we select the molecule
type we specifically pull on, and we then explore the molecules which
are characteristic of the immune synapse, which is one of the key
organisational structures that have profound implications in T cell
recognition and action [@baldari_immune:2017].

Using this approach, we probe not only the forces of recognition of the
given antibody to its target molecule, but also, by using strong
extracellular bridges, we probe the cytosolic link of the probed
molecule to the cytoskeleton. Such a link has been proposed to be
instrumental in the way T cells can apply or feel forces through the
molecule. A theoretical model has been built and will be reported in a
dedicated article [@manca_membrane:2022]. Aside, we will demonstrate the
application of the software on full data.

![Schematics of the experiment. A : Sequence of events (a) antibody
decorated bead, trapped by the focused infrared laser beam, and
lymphocyte are far from each other, and approached ; (b) contact is
formed under a controlled level of force and maintained for a given time
; (c) the cell is displaced away from the bead, eventually resulting in
the pulling of a tube (d) and its rupture (e), back to the situation of
(a). B : Resulting Force vs.Time curve with the indicated events.
Adapted from [@manca_membrane:2022]](dessin2.png){#fig:dessin
width="\\linewidth"}

The experimentally obtained data consists of force signal as a function
of time (among other parameters), in the three directions of space,
obtained in large quantities (at least 10 per cell / bead couple, and up
to 20 couples tested per sample), containing rich and detailed features
that can relate to molecular and/or cellular mechanics that our model
explores. It is therefore needed to standardize and semi-automatize data
analysis to help the experimentalist, often a biologist, to extract
relevant features from the experimental data sets.

# Statement of need

The avalaible software that comes with the optical tweezers setup
includes a data processing system, with a GUI, that allows the user to
follow pre-defined data processing schemes. Even if it already allows
the typical user to observe, manipulate, quantify and convert to plain
text and images the data, it is closed source and, as such, cannot
receive implementations of novel functions, depending on the
experimentalist needs.

In particular, regarding the above described application, the user
would have to interact a lot via mouse clicks and find an alternative use
of preexisting data processing functions to perform the (time) expensive
analysis required. This may introduce bias in the data, which may impair
user-to-user data comparison.

Aside, almost none, if any, open-source software has been proposed to
the community eg. via GitHub or GitLab for quantifying optical tweezers
experiments with living cells, while some have been proposed for Atomic
Force Microscopy force mode [@muller_nanite:2019], with a modular
capability. Among them, one can find, with the keywords \"optical
tweezers\", on GitHub :

-   https://github.com/ilent2/ott : an Optical Tweezers Toolbox for
    calculating the torques and forces on a bead in a simulated
    situation

-   https://github.com/ilent2/tweezers-ml : an Interactive Optical
    Tweezers simulation using Machine Learning

-   https://github.com/ghallsimpsons/optical_tweezers : set of macros
    for calibration

-   https://github.com/softmatterlab/OpticalTweezersTutorial : a
    tutorial

![Snapshots of OT-Analysis software. A : Starting window where data can
be selected and parameters for the analysis set. B : Setting the choice
of analysis, from fully automated to user-supervised. C : The main window of
supervision showing the raw data in the three directions of space, and
the results of the pre-analysis, allowing the user to amend the analysis
if needed.](dessin.png){#fig:dessin width="\\linewidth"}

Of note, OT setups usually allow to quantify the forces in the
three directions of space. Thus lateral forces resulting from small
geometric mis-alignments between a given bead and the cell can be
probed. As a consequence, our software has been designed to allow the
direct comparison between these three directions to select
curves where the force is detected mainly in one single direction
corresponding to the one selected during the experiment. Aside, we
introduced refined baseline corrections for forces that may be caused,
for T cells, by the deformation of the trap close to contact. We
quantify the cell mechanics, when pushing the bead on the cell, and also
cell adhesion or tube pulling when separating them. Due to the large
number of curves that are typically produced, we implemented data
processing by subsets, to be able to use regular or old
computers to be able to distribute it to our students.

We based our software on command line processing functions that we
developed in the lab, and implemented a user-friendly, modular, Qt based
GUI which is more than needed when a non-code-savy scientist wants to
process complex biological data.

Our resulting software, as such, can serve as a basis for adding new
features in the field of force measurements by optical tweezers.

# Example usage

The prototypical experiments consist in using optical tweezers to contact a cell with a trapped bead decorated with protein, in order to obtain some membrane tube pulling events upon separation. The first use of the present software is to ensure that such a pulling is specific to the protein decoration used. In this case, two sets of data curves (force vs. time) are obtained using an adhesive protein and a control protein (in our case an antibody specific for a surface protein of the cell and a second antibody, isotype to the first one, but not recognizing any surface protein a priori).

The software allows, after an automated pre-processing step, a inspection of the data by the user in order to amend the type selection and potentially refine, on a case per case basis, the data processing. The user can adjust several detection thresholds, e.g. for determining the duration and force amplitude that characterize adhesion events and potential tubes, and for tuning the detection and correction for optical artifacts. 

The outcome will provide graphical representations to:

-  evaluate the fraction of the positive events (adhesion + tubes) in the population of forces curves

    -  while rejecting the curves that are used for aligning the two substrates
      
    -  while excluding the curves where optical artifacts can be detected
      
    -   while removing from the analysis the curves that are "bad" (eg. when the bead is lost or when a second bead enters the trap) 

-  measure the duration and force magnitude of the positive events

-  measure the amount of tubes in the overall population.

The output file can then be reloaded using ad-hoc procedures (e.g. in Python) to merge or sort the data, plot, perform statistical analysis on relevant biophysical parameters described in https://github.com/phpuech/OT_Analysis.

The results of the analysis can then be used to feedback on the experimental parameters (contact force, contact duration, molecular densities on the beads, bead size) and / or compare different molecules in order to examine a biological effect (for this last point, see [@manca_membrane:2022]).

# Functionality documentation

We provide in the following figure the schematics of the structure of the code,
with the main files. 

![Schematics of the MVC conception of OT_Analysis.](mvc.png){#fig:mvc
width="\\linewidth"}

For a description of the functions and their arguments,
please refer to the online documentation provided in the link below :

https://otanalysis.readthedocs.io/en/latest/otanalysis.html?highlight=otanalysis


# Acknowledgements

We acknowledge data contributions from O. N'Dao, G. Eich, L. Normand. We
also acknowledge the work on a previous Tk based version of the GUI from
K. Himmet. We aknowledge the funding of Labex INFORM (ANR-11-LABX-0054
and AMIDEX project (ANR-11-IDEX-0001-02), funded by the
\"Investissements d'Avenir\" French Government program managed by the
French National Research Agency (ANR)) that allowed LAI to obtain the
optical tweezers set-up, and the continuous help from JPK
instruments/Bruker with it.

# References
